2017/02/25/slow-entrypoints.rst, before:

tags: [python, deployment, setuptools, performance, bug, rant]
summary: |
  …for small scripts.

Don't use setuptools entry points…
==================================

…for small scripts.

Setuptools provides a feature called *entry points* that can be used to define
for which functions the setup script should `create executables`_ – or to
`register plugins`_. This is pretty cool (and even works on windows)!

.. _create executables: http://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#automatic-script-creation
.. _register plugins: http://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#dynamic-discovery-of-services-and-plugins


The downside is that entry points have insanely bad startup times: A simple
*hello-world* program invoked through an entry point takes an embarrassing
**0.2 seconds (!!!)** to run on my system – and even *much* longer (about 2-5
seconds) if loaded for the first time.

Is this overhead due to loading the python environment itself? Let's have a
look. An executable for an entry point generated by setuptools generally does
something like this:

.. code-block:: python

    from pkg_resources import load_entry_point
    load_entry_point('hello_world', 'console_scripts', 'hello-world')()

The same application runs almost instantaneously, if we replace this as
follows:

.. code-block:: python

    import hello_world
    hello_world.main()

In fact, the main cost is from importing ``pkg_resources``. Try it yourself:

.. code-block:: bash

    % time python -c 'import pkg_resources'
    python -c 'import pkg_resources'  0.19s user 0.02s system 99% cpu 0.215 total

    % time python -c 'import hello_world'
    python -c 'import hello_world'  0.02s user 0.00s system 92% cpu 0.025 total

The issue_ is known but I'm not sure anyone is going to fix it anytime soon.

.. _issue: https://github.com/pypa/setuptools/issues/510

So what to do about it? For now I'm using fast-entry_points_ which patches the
setuptools script generator with a replacement as shown above.

.. _fast-entry_points: https://github.com/ninjaaron/fast-entry_points

Spread the word!

Commit message:

Publish "Always use pip for installation!"

2017/02/25/slow-entrypoints.rst, after:

tags: [python, deployment, setuptools, performance, bug, rant]
summary: |
  …for small scripts.

Don't use setuptools entry points…
==================================

…for small scripts.

**Update:** I realized that ``pip install`` doesn't have the problem described
here. This means that you can safely use entry points without any patches if
you recommend that users install with pip. For more information, see the post
`4 reasons to always use pip for installation`_.

.. _4 reasons to always use pip for installation: /2019/04/11/use-pip-for-install.rst

Setuptools provides a feature called *entry points* that can be used to define
for which functions the setup script should `create executables`_ – or to
`register plugins`_. This is pretty cool (and even works on windows)!

.. _create executables: http://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#automatic-script-creation
.. _register plugins: http://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/setuptools.html#dynamic-discovery-of-services-and-plugins


The downside is that entry points have insanely bad startup times: A simple
*hello-world* program invoked through an entry point takes an embarrassing
**0.2 seconds (!!!)** to run on my system – and even *much* longer (about 2-5
seconds) if loaded for the first time.

Is this overhead due to loading the python environment itself? Let's have a
look. An executable for an entry point generated by setuptools generally does
something like this:

.. code-block:: python

    from pkg_resources import load_entry_point
    load_entry_point('hello_world', 'console_scripts', 'hello-world')()

The same application runs almost instantaneously, if we replace this as
follows:

.. code-block:: python

    import hello_world
    hello_world.main()

In fact, the main cost is from importing ``pkg_resources``. Try it yourself:

.. code-block:: bash

    % time python -c 'import pkg_resources'
    python -c 'import pkg_resources'  0.19s user 0.02s system 99% cpu 0.215 total

    % time python -c 'import hello_world'
    python -c 'import hello_world'  0.02s user 0.00s system 92% cpu 0.025 total

The issue_ is known but I'm not sure anyone is going to fix it anytime soon.

.. _issue: https://github.com/pypa/setuptools/issues/510

So what to do about it? For now I'm using fast-entry_points_ which patches the
setuptools script generator with a replacement as shown above.

.. _fast-entry_points: https://github.com/ninjaaron/fast-entry_points

Spread the word!
